HIV/AIDS

During 1999, over 5 million people became newly infected with HIV – bringing to over 34 million the number of people living with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. The HIV/AIDS epidemic has claimed almost 19 million lives over the past two decades – including almost 4 million children. And it has left over 13 million children orphaned in its wake.
Life expectancy and child survival rates have plummeted in some of the worst affected countries and the disease is today having a major impact on social and economic development.
Hardest hit is sub-Saharan Africa where 24.5 million people are now living with HIV. In Botswana, almost 36% of the adult population are infected. 
Meanwhile in South Africa, where one in five of the population are HIV positive, over 4 million people are living with AIDS – more than in any other country in the world.

Prevention and care strategies for HIV
There is no cure for AIDS. However, a comprehensive package of prevention and care strategies – based on firm political commitment, can have a major impact on the burden and spread of HIV/AIDS.

Effective measures include:
ñ Accessible, inexpensive condoms 
ñ Immediate treatment of other sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
ñ Voluntary counselling and testing (VCT)
ñ Prevention of mother-to-child transmission
ñ Promotion of harm reduction to reduce HIV infection in drug users
ñ Sexual health education in school and beyond
ñ Accelerating access to care, support, and treatment, including psychosocial support, home and community-based care, and innovative new partnerships
to provide sustainable and affordable supplies of medicines and diagnostics.





Thailand achieves sustained reduction in HIV infection rates

In Thailand, government determination to enforce 100% condom use in brothels and to ensure wide access to HIV prevention campaigns through schools, the mass media, and the workplace have been key factors in lowering HIV infection rates. The broad-based campaign has led to an increase in condom use, a reduction in visits to sex workers, and a dramatic reduction in HIV infection rates.

A sustained and dramatic reduction in infection rates for HIV and other sexually transmitted infections has been achieved in Thailand over the past decade through government efforts to promote safe sex. From the early 1990s, the government worked in collaboration with brothel owners to ensure that the commercial sex industry did not become the main engine for a nationwide epidemic of HIV/AIDS. 
As a result, Thai men are today far less likely to visit sex workers. And those who do are more likely to use condoms. Meanwhile, condom use has also increased both among young people and in the general population. 
During the late 1980s, explosive epidemics of HIV among sex workers and injecting drug users threatened to spiral out of control – sparking off a major AIDS epidemic. In 1988, infection rates among injecting drug users rose alarmingly from zero to 30% over six months. A year later, the national HIV surveillance system revealed that in the northern city of Chiang Mai, 44% of sex workers were infected with HIV. There were fears that the HIV epidemic would seed itself in the general population – fuelled by the high proportion of men who visited sex workers. 
In response, a new national HIV prevention programme was launched in 1991 with high level political commitment at both national and regional levels. Each key government ministry developed its own AIDS plan and budget and government funding for HIV/AIDS was stepped up. The government forged partnerships with NGOs, the business community, people living with AIDS, religious leaders, and community leaders – engaging them in dialogue and resource mobilization for HIV prevention and care programmes. 
Although prostitution remains illegal in Thailand, the government took the pragmatic step of working with brothel owners to enforce 100% condom use in all commercial sex establishments. Under the scheme, condoms are distributed free to brothels, and sex workers are told to insist on condom use by all clients. Government efforts to police the scheme have included STI contact tracing and the use of government inspectors posing as would-be-clients in brothels. Commercial sex establishments that fail to comply can be shut down. 
The scheme has been highly successful. Reported condom use in brothels increased from only 14% of sex acts in 1989 to over 90% by 1994. Over the same period, the number of new STI cases among men treated at government clinics plummeted by over 90%. Regular surveys among young male recruits in the Thai army reveal similar changes in sexual behaviour and infection rates. HIV infection rates among 21-year-old military conscripts peaked at 4% in 1993 before falling steadily to below 1.5% in 1997. By 1995, fewer recruits were visiting sex workers (down from almost 60% of recruits in 1991 to about 25% by 1995) and condom use had increased. These changes in sexual behaviour were paralleled by a decline in HIV infections and other STIs. 
The HIV prevention programme also included a mass media campaign, workplace AIDS programmes, life-skills training for teenagers, peer education, and anti-discrimination campaigns. The media campaign urged respect for women and discouraged men from visiting brothels. And improved educational and vocational opportunities were made available for young women, especially in rural areas, to keep them out of the sex industry.
However, problems remain. Infection rates among injecting drug users remain high at 20%-45% nationwide. And in rural areas, HIV infection rates among sex workers have increased. In 1997, 20% of sex workers in rural areas were HIV-positive compared with only 7% in Bangkok. To make matters worse, studies carried out in rural areas reveal that only 50% of men who visit sex workers consistently use condoms. And as risk behaviour increasingly shifts from commercial sex to unprotected casual sex, efforts will be needed to sustain reduced infection rates.
Over the past decade, Thailand’s HIV prevention programme has been supported by an effective disease surveillance system which has succeeded in mapping the course of the epidemic. And it has also relied heavily on regular input from the behavioural information systems that were developed to monitor social and sexual behaviour patterns. Through its successful efforts to prevent high-risk sexual behaviour and promote safe sex, the government has demonstrated that it is possible to reverse the course of the epidemic nationwide within a relatively short period.


Uganda reverses the tide of HIV/AIDS 
Uganda’s success in reducing high HIV infection rates is the result of high-level political commitment
to HIV prevention and care, involving a wide range of partners and all sectors of society. Same-day results for HIV tests and social marketing of condoms and self-treatment kits for sexually transmitted infections, backed up by sex education programmes, have helped reduce very high HIV infection rates.

Uganda,one of the first countries in sub-Saharan Africa to experience the devastating impact of HIV/AIDS and to take action to control the epidemic, is one of the rare success stories in a region that has been ravaged by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. While the rate of new infections continues to increase in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Uganda has succeeded in lowering its very high infection rates. Since 1993, HIV infection rates among pregnant women, a key indicator of the progress of the epidemic, have been more than halved in some areas and infection rates among men seeking treatment for sexually transmitted infections have dropped by over a third.
In the capital city Kampala, the level of HIV infection among pregnant women attending antenatal clinics fell from 31% in 1993 to 14% by 1998. Meanwhile, outside Kampala, infection rates among pregnant women under 20 dropped from 21% in 1990 to 8% in 1998. Elsewhere, among men attending STI clinics, HIV infection rates fell from 46% in 1992 to 30% in 1998.
Success in reducing the prevalence of HIV in Uganda is the result of a broad-based national effort backed up by firm political commitment, including the personal involvement of the head of state, President Yoweri Museveni. From the outset, the government involved religious and traditional leaders, community groups, NGOs, and all sectors of society, forging a consensus around the need to contain the escalating spread of HIV and provide care and support for those affected. 
Sex education programmes in schools and on the radio focused on the need to negotiate safe sex and encouraged teenagers to delay the age at which they first have sex. Since 1990, a USAID-funded scheme to increase condom use through social marketing of condoms has boosted condom use from 7% nationwide to over 50% in rural areas and over 85% in urban areas. The social marketing scheme involved sales of condoms at subsidized prices or free distribution by both the government and the private sector. The scheme was also backed up by health education and other public information. Meanwhile more teenage girls reported condom use than any other age group – a trend reflected in falling infection rates among 13-19 year old girls in Masaka, in rural Uganda. And among 15-year-old boys and girls, the proportion who had never had sex rose from about 20% to 50% between 1989 and 1995. 
Condom use is also being encouraged among men who seek treatment for sexually transmitted infections. A new innovative social marketing scheme to promote the use of an STI self-treatment kit (“Clear Seven”) has proved to be successful in treating STIs and preventing HIV infection. The kit, which contains a 14-day course of tablets, condoms, partner referral cards, and an information leaflet, is designed to improve STI treatment rates, prevent over-the-counter sales of inappropriate treatments, encourage partner referral, and reinforce condom use. The distribution system relies on the use of small retail outlets which are normally licensed to sell over-the-counter drugs but not antibiotics. The Ugandan Government has waived these restrictions to promote sales of Clear Seven, marketed at the subsidized price of US$ 1.35, and trained shopkeepers in the management of STIs. As a result, cure rates for urethritis have increased from 46% to 87% and condom use during treatment has more than doubled (from 32% to 65%). 
Another innovation in Uganda was the launch in 1997 of same-day voluntary counselling and testing services. Up till then, clients had to wait two weeks for their HIV test results and up to 30% failed to return. Thousands of people who have taken advantage of same-day testing have since been recruited and trained as peer educators. So far, 180 000 people have been reached by the scheme and over a million condoms distributed. 
In Uganda, as elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa, AIDS has caused immense human suffering over the past two decades – setting back development and reducing life expectancy. Over 1.5 million children have been orphaned since the epidemic began – losing their mother or both parents to AIDS. Today there is hope that the tide can be turned at last. 


Senegal contains the spread of HIV 
In Senegal, social marketing of condoms, sex education campaigns, and improved treatment
for sexually transmitted infections have helped keep HIV infection rates at a very low level.
The government mounted a rapid response to the threat of HIV/AIDS, working with religious leaders and about 200 NGOs in wide-ranging efforts to contain the spread of the disease.

The West African country of Senegal is one of the few countries in sub-Saharan Africa to have succeeded in containing the spread of HIV from the outset. Since the first cases appeared in the country in the mid-1980s, infection rates have remained consistently low at under 2% – largely due to the success of a nationwide campaign to modify sexual behaviour. This has led to a massive increase in the use of condoms and a delay in the age at which teenage girls first have sex.
Senegal was one of the first countries to mount a rapid broad-based response to the looming threat of a full-scale epidemic of HIV. Political leaders were quick to recognize that efforts to change sexual behaviour were the key to preventing the spread of HIV. And that to achieve this, they would need the support of leaders of the country’s mainly Moslem and minority Christian religious communities.
Educational materials were designed and training sessions organized for religious leaders. The issue of HIV/AIDS became a regular feature of Friday service (Salat-al-Jumah) in mosques throughout Senegal, and religious leaders discussed the issue on TV and radio. Brochures were produced to ensure that AIDS education was incorporated into religious teaching programmes. And Christian religious leaders, including those of the Catholic faith, also developed a supportive approach to prevention – providing counselling and psychosocial support and advocating tolerance and care. Although the issue of condom promotion – especially outside marriage – remains an ethical minefield for the country’s religious leaders, they have had the courage to refer people to alternative service providers. 
By 1995, about 200 NGOs were involved in HIV prevention and care services in Senegal, together with women’s groups with a membership of about half a million. HIV prevention was included in sex education programmes at school and outreach services were provided for those outside the school system.
Within this supportive climate, prevention efforts have been targeted to both high-risk groups and to the wider population. Sex workers –who, in Senegal, must be registered and undergo regular health checks – were urged to promote condom use among their clients. Many of the sex workers established support groups to safeguard their health in the face of AIDS. Prevention efforts were also targeted to men who regularly visit sex workers and to regular suppliers of casual sex. Weekly markets were visited as well as venues frequented by transport workers or migrant labourers – both high-risk groups for HIV infection. Meanwhile, voluntary counselling and testing services were made available throughout Senegal.
Education campaigns were backed up by social marketing of condoms and concerted efforts to improve STI treatment services. The number of condoms distributed skyrocketed from 800 000 in 1988 to over 7 million by 1997. Condom use by men during casual sexual encounters rose from under 1% before the AIDS epidemic began to 68% by 1997. Meanwhile, in a 1998 study of condom use by sex workers, 99% reported using a condom with their most recent new client and 97% with their most recent regular client. In addition, 60% reported using condoms with men who were not clients. 
HIV prevention efforts have also had an impact on the age at which teenage girls first have sex. In 1997, most Senegalese women in their early 20s did not have sex before they were 19 or older – three years later than their mothers’ generation.
The widespread change in sexual behaviour has contributed to a marked decline in the prevalence of sexually transmitted infections – a key risk factor for subsequent infection with HIV. However, sex workers remain one of the most vulnerable groups. While less than 7% of sex workers in Dakar are infected with HIV, in some areas in the south of the country, as many as one in five sex workers have been found to be HIV-positive. 
From the outset, the Senegal Government has made AIDS a health and development priority, with a particular emphasis on HIV prevention activities targeting youth and women. Since 1988, the government funding for AIDS has grown from US$ 100 000 a year to US$ 750 000 today. And Senegal is among the first countries in Africa to have established a national programme for STI control that is integrated into regular primary health care services. However, continued vigilance will be needed if Senegal is to maintain its low level of HIV infection rates.