Tuberculosis

TB kills 1.7 million people every year. Of these, almost half a million people are co-infected with HIV. One in three of the global population – about 2 billion people – have latent TB infection, but only about 10% of them will go on to develop the disease.
TB is spread by infectious droplets – through coughing, sneezing, or spitting. It thrives in conditions of poverty and overcrowding. A person with active TB can infect an average of 15 people a year.
Every year there are about 8 million new TB cases and the poorest and most vulnerable are at highest risk. The disease strikes people during their most productive years. Three out of four deaths occur between the ages of 15 and 54.

DOTS 

Millions of TB deaths could be prevented through the widespread use of DOTS, an inexpensive strategy for the detection and treatment of TB. The strategy can detect and cure TB even in the poorest countries. In 1997, the average treatment success rate worldwide was almost 80%. However, less than 25% of people who are sick with TB are treated through the DOTS strategy.

DOTS is a 5-pronged strategy for TB control involving:
ñ government commitment to sustained TB control
ñ detection of TB cases through sputum smear microscopy
	among symptomatic people
ñ regular and uninterrupted supply of high-quality TB drugs
ñ 6-8 months of regularly supervised treatment (including direct
	observation of drug-taking for at least the first two months)
ñ reporting systems to monitor treatment progress
	and programme performance.

While DOTS has been shown to be successful in many different settings worldwide, the effectiveness of this strategy is facing two new challenges: the spread of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) and the co-epidemic of TB/HIV. To address these challenges, WHO and its partners have established two initiatives: DOTS-Plus for MDR-TB and proTest for TB/HIV.

DOTS-Plus is a pilot strategy to address multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB), defined as resistant to at least isoniazid and rifampicin, the two most powerful TB drugs. DOTS-Plus includes the five elements of the DOTS strategy and in addition takes into account specific issues that need to be addressed in areas where there is a relatively high prevalence of MDR-TB. The aim is to assess the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of treating MDR-TB with these second-line drugs in resource-limited settings.

proTest, a new initiative in sub-Saharan Africa, is promoting voluntary counselling and testing for HIV as an entry point for a range of HIV and TB prevention and care interventions. Two-thirds of the people living with HIV worldwide are in sub-Saharan Africa and over 90% do not know they are infected. The region accounts for 70% of all co-infections with TB/HIV .







Peru set to halve new TB cases every 10 years

High-level political commitment to TB control in Peru has produced one of the most successful
DOTS programmes in the world. On current trends, the number of new TB cases in Peru
could be halved every 10 years. Diagnosis and treatment are provided free of charge and low-income families receive food packages to encourage compliance with treatment. 

One of the world’s most successful TB programmes, the nationwide programme in Peru, has provided the first evidence that widespread use of DOTS prevents new cases of TB. New research shows that the decline in the incidence of TB in Peru almost doubled between 1991 and 1999 through the implementation of DOTS – preventing at least 70 000 cases and deaths. If this trend continues, the incidence of TB in Peru could be halved every 10 years.
Peru is one of only a handful of high-burden countries to have met the WHO targets for TB control of 70% case detection rates and 85% cure rates. The country has one of the highest TB incidence rates in the Americas and is among the 22 countries accounting for 80% of the new TB cases occurring worldwide each year. Peru accounts for only 3% of the population of the Americas but has 15% of its TB cases. 
Before the DOTS programme was launched in Peru in 1990, only 50% of people diagnosed with TB were able to get treatment. And of those, only half were cured. Drugs were in short supply, record systems non-existent, and health workers overworked and demoralized. Inflation was soaring and a newly elected government was negotiating to end a guerilla war that had killed thousands and destroyed much of the country’s infrastructure, including many of its health centres. This was highlighted in 1991, when a three-year-old boy achieved unwanted celebrity as the last case of polio in the Americas. He caught polio after his local health centre was destroyed by guerillas – preventing childhood immunization.
Peru’s incoming government recognized that TB control was a social, political, and economic priority – increasing the TB budget from US$ 600 000 to US$ 5 million a year. With high-level political commitment, adequate funding for drugs, and dynamic leadership, the new DOTS programme in Peru had a head start. Today, TB diagnosis and treatment are provided free of charge, drug financing is sustainable, and the programme has become a model for training managerial staff from other Latin American countries. Drugs, equipment, and other supplies are purchased and distributed at the central level. Food packages are provided for low-income families as an incentive to comply with treatment and funding has been provided to establish patient and family support groups. In sparsely populated remote areas such as the Amazonas jungle and high plateaux, treatment delivery is adapted to the needs of the patient to ensure access and completion of treatment. The treatment comprises initial daily administration of drugs followed by twice-weekly drug therapy. All drug doses are directly observed to ensure compliance. 
By 1997, the entire population was covered by the DOTS programme and almost 90% of patients were being cured. And by 1998, an estimated 94% of TB cases were being detected. The number of health centres participating in the programme soared from under 1000 in 1991 to over 6000 by 1999. And as efforts to detect new cases intensified, the number of laboratories capable of carrying out sputum smear tests rose from about 300 in 1989 to over 1000 by 1999. As efforts to improve diagnosis were stepped up, there was a sharp increase in the number of cases notified between 1990 and 1993. Since then, the number of new cases has steadily declined.
Peru is the first of the 22 countries with a high TB burden to systematically address the problem of multidrug-resistant TB. Since 1997, about 800 patients with chronic TB have been treated with the WHO standardized treatment, with good results. Treatment costs for chronic TB cases are far higher at about US$ 2500 a patient. However, funds have been made available as a result of overall savings in treatment costs due to the drop in TB cases nationwide. In addition, about 80 patients with multidrug-resistant TB have received specialist individualized treatment through a Harvard University project. WHO is monitoring this project so that the experience can be applied to other countries.



China halves TB deaths through DOTS

The DOTS programme in China, the largest DOTS programme in the world, prevents about 30 000 deaths a year. Over 90% of patients treated are cured. Treatment is provided free of charge and village health workers are paid a bonus for every TB case they identify and for every patient they cure. 

In China, the world’s largest DOTS programme – serving over 700 million people – is today preventing an estimated 50% of all TB deaths in areas covered by the programme. New research, based on data from the first seven years of operation, has revealed that the programme saves about 
30 000 lives a year. 
The DOTS programme, funded through a US$ 58 million World Bank loan and matching funds from the Chinese Government, is one of the most successful DOTS programmes in the world. Among the TB patients treated, over 90% are cured. Over the past eight years, more than half a million infectious TB cases have been successfully treated. 
Progress has been rapid and dramatic. In 1990, tuberculosis accounted for one in two of all deaths from infectious diseases in China. A nationwide survey found that an alarming six out of every 1000 people had some form of TB. Of these, about 25% were infectious. Many could not afford the treatment costs or defaulted on treatment when they could no longer meet the cost of drugs. Of those who started treatment, less than half were cured. The remainder continued to spread infection – each with the potential to infect up to 15 people a year. Some developed multidrug-resistant forms of the disease which are extremely difficult to cure and can inflate treatment costs 100-fold. 
In 1991, after a review of China’s national TB programme by WHO and the World Bank, the government launched a series of pilot projects involving the use of DOTS. The trial involved people living in urban areas near Beijing as well as rural areas in Hebei province. Expensive and all too often ineffective hospital-based treatment was jettisoned. In its place came the new DOTS programme – providing village-level treatment through the supervised use of a cocktail of four inexpensive drugs. Diagnosis and treatment were made available free of charge and village health workers paid a bonus for every TB case identified and for every patient certified to be cured. The health worker was responsible for storing the drugs and monitoring each patient to ensure they took the correct dose of drugs at the right time. In addition, the health worker was responsible for organizing periodic sputum checks in a laboratory to monitor progress and verify eventual cure.
Spurred by the success of these pilot projects, which notched up a 94% cure rate, the DOTS strategy was extended to 13 of China’s 31 provinces in 1992. Treatment involves a 6-month course of drugs to be taken under supervision every other day. Drugs are obtained on the international market at competitive prices – about US$ 20 for a 6-month course of drugs – supplies are centralized, and treatment is free. However, in provinces not covered by the DOTS programme, drugs are bought locally, quality is often poor, prices inevitably higher. And patients are normally required to pay for the full cost of medical treatment and drugs. It is not yet clear how the Chinese Government will address these disparities as it considers the future of the DOTS programme, and its possible extension nationwide, after the World Bank funding comes to an end in mid-2001. 
Despite the outstanding success of the DOTS programme in treating TB and preventing deaths in the provinces it serves, the needs remain as great as ever in other provinces. In this vast country of 1.2 billion people, tuberculosis still claims more lives than any other infectious disease. Over 400 million people have been infected with the TB bacillus. Every year, 1.4 million people develop active TB and over a quarter of a million people die from it. Today as China’s DOTS programme enters its final year of World Bank funding, there is a critical need to sustain the DOTS strategy and to expand it to cover the entire country. For the millions of people who remain infected with TB throughout China, universal access to DOTS is long overdue.


DOTS coverage and treatment success rate soars in India 

In India, which accounts for 30% of the global burden of TB, the DOTS programme is undergoing
massive expansion as treatment success rates double and death rates fall. Government commitment, community involvement, and partnerships have all been key factors in the success of the DOTS programme in India.

A massive expansion of TB treatment using DOTS is today under way in India. By the end of 2000, one in four of the population – over 250 million people – will be covered by the strategy. By the end of 2002, it is planned that half the country will be covered. Eventually, it is hoped that the entire population of over one billion will have access to DOTS.
Up until late 1998, only 2% of the population were covered by DOTS. By early 1999, the number had soared to over 120 million and the numbers have been rising ever since. 
The logistics involved in such rapid large-scale expansion were considerable. Over 10 000 doctors had to be trained, 2000 laboratory technicians, and 100 000 allied health workers. An additional 500 staff were employed. Almost 3000 microscopes had to be purchased and enough TB drugs to treat over 400 000 patients. Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of technical documents had to be finalized and printed. Any future expansion will have to be phased to ensure that drug supplies, training, supervision, and monitoring can all be guaranteed.
The stakes are high. India accounts for about 30% of the global burden of TB. An estimated one in two of the adult population are infected with the TB bacterium. Every year, two million people develop active tuberculosis – more than in any other country in the world. And about 450 000 die from it – more than the total deaths from AIDS, malaria, and tropical diseases combined. 
Launched in 1993 with a series of successful small-scale pilot projects, the DOTS programme has shown continued impressive success rates. A recent analysis of the impact of the programme found that 80% of cases were successfully treated – twice as many as in the previous TB programme. Death rates among infectious patients treated within the programme were 4%, compared with a rate over seven times higher in the non-DOTS programme. 
India’s DOTS programme is mainly financed through a U$ 142 million low-interest loan from the World Bank, with an increasing proportion of the costs already being met by the national and state governments. Treatment is supervised by health workers, community volunteers, traditional birth attendants, and community or religious leaders. Community workers supervise treatment for patients with limited access to a health centre. Additional staff are provided to serve difficult mountainous, tribal, and urban areas. 
In order to maintain the uninterrupted supply of drugs throughout the treatment period, each patient is allocated an individual box at the outset containing the full course of treatment. This helps ensure that no patient has to stop treatment because drugs are not available, even in the event of a break in the drugs supply chain. 
Ironically, India was one of the seedbeds for the global DOTS strategy, but it was many years before the idea took root there. In the 1950s, the Tuberculosis Research Centre in Chennai (formerly Madras) demonstrated that treatment observation is both necessary and feasible in the community, using intermittent treatment. In the early 1960s, India demonstrated that most TB patients did not need to be in hospital. In Madras, even destitute people living on the streets in slum areas were successfully treated with a regular supervised course of TB drugs. Meanwhile, the National Tuberculosis Institute in Bangalore demonstrated that, with minimal training and regular supervision, technicians working at the periphery could carry out sputum smear microscopy – enabling this to become the primary tool for diagnosis of TB. 
Today, as India establishes the second largest DOTS programme in the world (after China), the wheel has turned full circle. But there is still a long way to go before DOTS is available country-wide. 



Preventing TB deaths in one of the world’s poorest countries

In Nepal – one of the poorest and least accessible countries in the world – 75% of the population have access to DOTS. Treatment success rates more than doubled between 1994 and 1999 and the programme prevents thousands of TB deaths a year. This achievement is the result of government commitment, support from a wide range of partners, and the use of innovative ways of ensuring access to DOTS – especially in remote areas.

In the mountain kingdom of Nepal – one of the poorest countries in the world – almost half of the over 20 million population are infected with TB. Of these, up to 90 000 people have active TB and there are 44 000 new cases of the disease every year. 
Yet today, following a rapid expansion in access to DOTS, the Government of Nepal is succeeding in preventing thousands of TB deaths a year. The number of people dying from TB has plummeted from an estimated 15 000-18 000 in 1994 to about 8000-11 000 today.
Launched in 1996 with four pilot projects, the DOTS programme has been extended to reach 75% of the population today. Treatment success rates have more than doubled from 40% in 1994 to over 88% in 1999 – a treatment success rate that was maintained throughout the four years of programme expansion. Meanwhile, case detection rates, another measure of success, have surged from 30% in 1994 to 67% in 1999, just short of the WHO target of 70% case detection.
The programme has benefited greatly from government commitment, community support, and assistance from a range of both international agencies and NGOs. In three out of the five regions covered by DOTS, NGOs provide advice and support services for government efforts, including training. 
But success has not been easy and many hurdles remain before DOTS can be extended nationwide. Much of Nepal is remote mountain and hilly terrain and many areas are sparsely populated – making drug distribution and treatment supervision extremely difficult. Drugs are distributed from the central level to regional stores and from there supplied to the district, usually by vehicle or plane. From there, the drugs have to be carried by bike or on foot to some treatment centres. In some areas, additional sub-health posts are used as DOTS-providing TB subcentres in an effort to extend coverage. Patients can be treated there and only have to go to a health centre for occasional sputum checks to monitor progress.
In eastern Nepal, hostels have been established in some districts for TB patients living in remote hill districts. People are encouraged to stay in the hostels for the first two months of treatment to ensure that the initial treatment period is supervised. Meanwhile the Government of Nepal is working with researchers to investigate the feasibility of community volunteers and family members supervising DOTS in remote hilly areas. 
Efforts are also under way to encourage private sector doctors to refer TB patients for DOTS treatment or to establish DOTS centres in the private sector. The approach is flexible, the main aim being to ensure all TB patients have access to DOTS. Regular meetings are held with private practitioners to discuss the DOTS programme and encourage an exchange of information. Meanwhile, a clinical manual on DOTS treatment has been produced for use by doctors.
Other concerns include an increase in the number of people co-infected with HIV and TB (currently almost 2% of TB cases) and an increase in the incidence of multidrug-resistant forms of TB (over 1% of TB cases).
Today, efforts are continuing to expand DOTS coverage to the entire population. The aim is to ensure that for every 100 000 people in Nepal there is a DOTS treatment centre within the primary health care system, supported by a microscopy centre for diagnosis and treatment monitoring. It is estimated that almost 60 000 TB deaths will be prevented by the DOTS programme in Nepal over the next five years.